Add CRD Validation Rules to Beta blog post (#35459)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2022-07-27-crd-validation-rules-graduate-to-beta.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Kubernetes 1.25: CustomResourceDefinition Validation Rules Graduate to Beta"
date: 2022-07-27

> slug: tbd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
slug: crd-validation-rules-beta
```

> canonicalUrl: tbd

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
We're not mirroring this article from elsewhere.

---

**Authors:** Joe Betz (Google), Kermit Alexander (Google)

> In Kubernetes 1.25, [Validation rules for CustomResourceDefinitions](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#validation-rules) (CRDs) have graduated to Beta!

Reviewer: Ideally, link to the section about validation rules in the CRD concept docs (if there isn't a section yet, please mention the PR that'll add it so that a reviewer can cross-check).

Author: Good catch. We don't have the section yet. I'll get that sorted out and fix this link.

Author: This might be too much to fix in time for this blog entry, but I've opened https://github.com/kubernetes/website/issues/35991 to address the larger issue here.

```yaml
apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
    ...
    openAPIV3Schema:
      type: object
      properties:
        spec:
          type: object
          x-kubernetes-validations:
            - rule: "self.minReplicas <= self.replicas && self.replicas <= self.maxReplicas"
              message: "replicas should be in the range minReplicas..maxReplicas."
          properties:
            replicas:
              type: integer
            ...
```

Validation rules support a wide range of use cases. To get a sense of some of the capabilities, let's look at a few examples:

| Validation Rule | Purpose |
| - | - |
| `self.minReplicas <= self.replicas` | Validate an integer field is less than or equal to another integer field |
| `'Available' in self.stateCounts` | Validate an entry with the 'Available' key exists in a map |
| `self.set1.all(e, !(e in self.set2))` | Validate that the elements of two sets are disjoint |
| `self == oldSelf` | Validate that a required field is immutable once it is set |
| `self.created + self.ttl < self.expired` | Validate that 'expired' date is after a 'create' date plus a 'ttl' duration |

> Validation rules are expressive and flexible. See the [Validation Rules documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#validation-rules) to learn more about what validation rules are capable of.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Validation rules are expressive and flexible. See the [Validation Rules documentation](/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#validation-rules) to learn more about what validation rules are capable of.
```

Ideally, link to the section about validation rules in the CRD concept docs (if there isn't a section yet, please mention the PR that'll add it so that a reviewer can cross-check).

* CEL expressions are compiled and type checked against a CRD's schema "ahead-of-time" (when CRDs are created and updated) allowing them to be evaluated efficiently and safely "runtime" (when custom resources are validated). Even regex string literals in CEL are validated and pre-compiled when CRDs are created or updated.

## Why not use validation webhooks?

Benefits of using validation rules when compared with validation webhooks:

* CRD authors benefit from a simpler workflow since validation rules eliminate the need to develop and maintain a webhook.
* Cluster administrators benefit by no longer having to install, upgrade and operate webhooks for the purposes of CRD validation.
* Cluster operability improves because CRD validation no longer requires a remote call to a webhook endpoint, eliminating a potential point of failure in the request-serving-path of the Kubernetes API server. This allows clusters to retain high availability while scaling to larger amounts of installed CRD extensions, since expected control plane availability would otherwise decrease with each additional webhook installed. 

> ## Getting Started with Validation Rules
> 
> ### Writing Validation Rules in OpenAPIv3 Schemas
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Getting started with validation rules

### Writing validation rules in OpenAPIv3 schemas

```

> Validation rules can be declared at any level of a CRD's OpenAPIv3 schema and are scoped to their location in the schema they are declared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can define validation rules for any level of a CRD's OpenAPIv3 schema. Validation rules are automatically scoped to their location in the schema where they are declared.
```

> Best practices for validation rules:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good practices for CRD validation rules:
```

* Scope validation rules as close as possible to the fields(s) they validate.
* Use multiple rules when validating independent constraints.
* Do not use validation rules for validations already 
* Use OpenAPIv3 [value validations](https://swagger.io/specification/#properties) (`maxLength`, `maxItems`, `maxProperties`, `required`, `enum`, `minimum`, `maximum`, ..) and [string formats](https://swagger.io/docs/specification/data-models/data-types/#format) where available.
* Use `x-kubernetes-int-or-string`, `x-kubernetes-embedded-type` and `x-kubernetes-list-type=(set|map)` were appropriate.

> Best practice examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples of good practice:
```

| Validation | Best Practice | Example(s) |
| - | - | - |
| Validate an integer is between 0 and 100. | Use OpenAPIv3 value validations. | <pre>type: integer<br>minimum: 0<br>maximum: 100</pre> |
| Constraint the max size limits on maps (objects with additionalProperties), arrays and string. | Use OpenAPIv3 value validations. Recommended for all maps, arrays and strings. This best practice is essential for rule cost estimation (explained below). | <pre>type:<br>maxItems: 100</pre> |
| Require a date-time be more recent than a particular timestamp. | Use OpenAPIv3 string formats to declare that the field is a date-time. Use validation rules to compare it to a particular timestamp. | <pre>type: string<br>format: date-time<br>x-kubernetes-validations:<br>  - rule: "self >= timestamp('2000-01-01T00:00:00.000Z')"</pre> |
| Require two sets to be disjoint. | Use x-kubernetes-list-type to validate that the arrays are sets. <br>Use validation rules to validate the sets are disjoint. | <pre>type: object<br>properties:<br>  set1:<br>    type: array<br>    x-kubernetes-list-type: set<br>  set2: ...<br>  x-kubernetes-validations:<br>    - rule: "!self.set1.all(e, !(e in self.set2))"</pre>

> ## Using Transition Rules

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## CRD transition rules
```

> [Transition Rules](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#transition-rules) make it possible to compare the new state against the old state of a resource in validation rules.  Any validation rule that uses 'oldSelf' is a transition rule.  Transition rules are only evaluated when an old value and new value exist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Transition Rules](/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#transition-rules) make it possible to compare the new state against the old state of a resource in validation rules. You use transition rules to make sure that the cluster's API server does not accept invalid state transitions. A transition rule is a validation rule that references 'oldSelf'. The API server only evaluates transition rules when both an old value and new value exist.
```

Transition rule examples:

| Transition Rule | Purpose |
| - | - |

> | `self == oldSelf` | Validate that a required field is immutable once it is set. This does not prevent an optional field from transitioning from unset to set or set to unset.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `self == oldSelf` | For a required field, make that field immutable once it is set. For an optional field, only allow transitioning from unset to set, or from set to unset. |
```

> | on parent of field: `has(self.field) == has(oldSelf.field)`<br>on field:  `self == oldSelf` | Validate that an optional field never changes after the resource is created.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| (on parent of field) `has(self.field) == has(oldSelf.field)`<br>on field:  `self == oldSelf` | Make a field immutable: validate that a field, even if optional, never changes after the resource is created (for a required field, the previous rule is simpler). |
```

> | `self.all(x, x in oldSelf)` | Validate that a set is append-only.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `self.all(x, x in oldSelf)` | Only allow adding items to a field that represents a set (prevent removals). |
```

| `self >= oldSelf` | Validate that a number is monotonically increasing.|

## Using the Functions Libraries

Validation rules have access to a couple different function libraries:

* CEL standard functions, defined in the [list of standard definitions](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/v0.7.0/doc/langdef.md#list-of-standard-definitions)
* CEL standard [macros](https://github.com/google/cel-spec/blob/v0.7.0/doc/langdef.md#macros)
* CEL [extended string function library](https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/google/cel-go@v0.11.2/ext#Strings)

> * Kubernetes [CEL extension library](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver@v0.24.0/pkg/apiserver/schema/cel/library#pkg-functions) which includes supplemental functions for [lists](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver@v0.24.0/pkg/apiserver/schema/cel/library#pkg-functions), [regex](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver@v0.24.0/pkg/apiserver/schema/cel/library#Regex), and [URLs](https://pkg.go.dev/k8s.io/apiextensions-apiserver@v0.24.0/pkg/apiserver/schema/cel/library#Regex).

Reviewer: Should these links actually be to v0.25.0?

Author: No, looks like I can omit the version part entirely. I'll fix.

Examples of function libraries in use:

| Validation Rule | Purpose |
| - | - |
| `!(self.getDayOfWeek() in [0, 6])` | Validate that a date is not a Sunday or Saturday. |
| `isUrl(self) && url(self).getHostname() in [a.example.com', 'b.example.com']` | Validate that a URL has an allowed hostname. |
| `self.map(x, x.weight).sum() == 1` | Validate that the weights of a list of objects sum to 1. |
| `int(self.find('^[0-9]*')) < 100` | Validate that a string starts with a number less than 100. |
| `self.isSorted()` | Validates that a list is sorted. |

> ## Resource Limits

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Resource use and limits
```

> To prevent CEL evaluation from consuming excessive compute resources, validation rules impose some limits. These limits are based on CEL "cost units", a platform and machine independent measure of execution cost. As a result, the limits are the same regardless of where they are enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent CEL evaluation from consuming excessive compute resources, validation rules impose some limits. These limits are based on CEL _cost units_, a platform and machine independent measure of execution cost. As a result, the limits are the same regardless of where they are enforced.
```

> ### Estimated Cost Limit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Estimated cost limit
```

> CEL is, by design, non-Turing-complete in such a way that the halting problem isn’t a concern. CEL takes advantage of this design choice to include an "estimated cost" subsystem that can statically compute the worst case run time cost of any CEL expression. Validation rules are [integrated with the estimated cost system](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#resource-use-by-validation-functions) and disallow CEL expressions from being included in CRDs if they have a sufficiently poor (high) estimated cost. The estimated cost limit is set quite high and typically requires an O(n^2) or worse operation, across something of unbounded size, to be exceeded. Fortunately the fix is usually quite simple: because the cost system is aware of size limits declared in the CRD's schema, CRD authors can add size limits to the CRD's schema  (`maxItems` for arrays, `maxProperties` for maps, `maxLength` for strings) to reduce the estimated cost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CEL is, by design, non-Turing-complete in such a way that the halting problem isn’t a concern. CEL takes advantage of this design choice to include an "estimated cost" subsystem that can statically compute the worst case run time cost of any CEL expression. Validation rules are [integrated with the estimated cost system](o/docs/tasks/extend-kubernetes/custom-resources/custom-resource-definitions/#resource-use-by-validation-functions) and disallow CEL expressions from being included in CRDs if they have a sufficiently poor (high) estimated cost. The estimated cost limit is set quite high and typically requires an O(n^2) or worse operation, across something of unbounded size, to be exceeded. Fortunately the fix is usually quite simple: because the cost system is aware of size limits declared in the CRD's schema, CRD authors can add size limits to the CRD's schema  (`maxItems` for arrays, `maxProperties` for maps, `maxLength` for strings) to reduce the estimated cost.
```

_aside_
The docs for the cost estimation system really belong within either https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/ or https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/
Task pages are really for explaining what the reader must do to achieve an outcome, and therefore aren't the right place for longer explanations.

Author: This is a really good point.  I feel like we've got a more general problem with CRD documentation here. I'll track it and start working on reorganizing it to fit the concept/task grouping.

> Best Practice:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good practice:
```

Set `maxItems`, `maxProperties` and `maxLength` on all array, map (`object` with `additionalProperties`) and string types in CRD schemas! This results in lower and more accurate estimated costs and generally makes a CRD safer to use.

> ### Runtime Cost Limit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Runtime cost limits for CRD validation rules
```

This helps with SEO by avoiding sending readers here when they want to limit the financial cost of running Kubernetes.

Author: Nice.

In addition to the estimated cost limit, CEL keeps track of actual cost while evaluating a CEL expression and will halt execution of the expression if a limit is exceeded.

With the estimated cost limit already in place, the runtime cost limit is rarely encountered. But it is possible. For example, it might be encountered for a large resource composed entirely of a single large list and a validation rule that is either evaluated on each element in the list, or traverses the entire list.

CRD authors can ensure the runtime cost limit will not be exceeded in much the same way the estimated cost limit is avoided: by setting `maxItems`, `maxProperties` and `maxLength` on array, map and string types.

> ## Future Work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Future work
```

> We look forward to working with the community on the adoption of Validation Rules and hope to see it promoted to GA in the near future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We look forward to working with the community on the adoption of CRD Validation Rules, and hope to see this feature promoted to general availability in an upcoming Kubernetes release!
```

(graduation before 1.26? Unlikely :wink:)

Author: I certainly won't be pushing for GA in 1.26.  Time to let the feature settle in for a bit.  Phrasing is nice here, thanks!

---
layout: blog

> title: "CustomResourceDefinition Validation Rules Graduating to Beta in 1.25"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Kubernetes 1.25: CustomResourceDefinition Validation Rules Graduate to Beta"
```

Reviewer 2: s/Graduate/Graduates?
